
--- Page 1 ---
2025
Senior Health Partners  
Member Handbook
0983-24_EN SHP25_16

--- Page 2 ---
Page 2 | 2025 Healthfirst Member Handbook

--- Page 3 ---
Senior Health Partners Managed Long Term Care (MLTC) plan 
Page 3
Table of Contents
Welcome To Healthfirst’s Senior Health Partners Managed Long Term Care Plan! ............4
Eligibility for Enrollment in the MLTC Plan .....................................................................................6
New York Independent Assessor Program (NYIAP) ‑ Initial Assessment Process .................7
Enrollment .............................................................................................................................................8
Withdrawal of Enrollment  .................................................................................................................9
Plan Member (ID) Card  ....................................................................................................................10
Services Covered By The Senior Health Partners MLTC Plan ..................................................11
Transitional Care Procedures ..........................................................................................................15
Money Follows The Person (MFP)/Open Doors .........................................................................16
Medicaid Services Not Covered By Our Plan ..............................................................................16
Services Not Covered By Senior Health Partners OR Medicaid ..............................................18
Service Authorizations, Actions, and Action Appeals ................................................................18
Complaints and Complaint Appeals ..............................................................................................27
Disenrollment From Senior Health Partners MLTC Plan .......................................................... 29
Cultural And Linguistic Competency ............................................................................................31
Member Rights And Responsibilities ............................................................................................ 32
Healthfirst Locations .........................................................................................................................37

--- Page 4 ---
Page 4 | 2025 Healthfirst Member Handbook
Welcome To Healthfirst’s Senior Health 
Partners Managed Long Term Care Plan!
Welcome to Senior Health Partners Managed Long Term Care (MLTC) plan. The MLTC 
plan is specifically designed for people who have Medicaid and who need health and 
Community Based Long Term Services and Supports (CBLTSS) like home care and 
personal care to stay in their homes and communities as long as possible.
Senior Health Partners is a Healthfirst plan. Healthfirst is New York’s largest not‑for‑profit 
health insurer. We have been offering affordable plans to New Yorkers for 30 years.
As a Senior Health Partners member, you will get services from providers who are 
in‑network. The plan and your providers will help you stay in your home for as long as 
possible. You can access the Provider Directory at healthfirst.org/find‑a‑doctor or by 
calling Member Services and asking for a directory to be mailed to you.
This handbook tells you about the added benefits Senior Health Partners covers since 
you are enrolled in the plan. It also tells you how to request a service, file a complaint, 
or disenroll from Senior Health Partners. Please keep this handbook as a reference, as it 
includes important information regarding Senior Health Partners and the advantages of 
our plan. You’ll need this handbook to learn what services are covered and how to get 
these services.

--- Page 5 ---
Senior Health Partners Managed Long Term Care (MLTC) plan 
Page 5
Help From Member Services
You can call us at any time, 24 hours a day, seven days a week, at the 
Member Services number below. 
There is someone to help you at Member Services:
 Call 1‑800‑633‑9717 
For TTY, 1‑888‑542‑3821 for English; 1‑888‑867‑4132 for Spanish
Important Senior Health Partners Phone Numbers 
Care Team
1‑800‑633‑9717 
Quality Management Department
1‑800‑633‑9717 
Enrollment Unit
1‑866‑585‑9280 
Other Important Phone Numbers
EyeMed (Vision Services)
TOLL FREE: 1‑844‑844‑0883 
Monday to Friday, 8am–6pm
DentaQuest (Dental Services)
1‑800‑508‑2047 
Monday to Friday, 8am–6pm
Independent Consumer Advocacy Network (ICAN)
1‑844‑614‑8800 
New York Medicaid Choice
1‑888‑401‑6582 
New York State Department of Health
1‑866‑712‑7197 
NYC Human Resources Administration
1‑718‑557‑1399 
NY Connects: Your Link to Long Term Services 
and Supports | Office for the Aging
800‑342‑9871
Westchester County Dept. of Social Services*
1‑914‑995‑5000
*General Information for City Offices number
The State of New York has created a Participant Ombudsman Program called the 
Independent Consumer Advocacy Network (ICAN) to provide Participants/Members 
free, confidential assistance on any services offered by Healthfirst Health Plan, 
Inc. ICAN may be reached toll‑free at 1‑844‑614‑8800 or online at icannys.org. 
(TTY users call 711, then follow the prompts to dial 1‑844‑614‑8800.)
Special services are available for people with special needs. If you have special needs, 
call us and we will help you find services (and providers) that will fit your needs. 
We also can provide materials in large print, braille, audio, or other formats if you ask us. 
We can help you get VCO (Voice Carry‑Over) or TTY (Text Telephone Device) by dialing 
1‑888‑542‑3821 (English); 1‑888‑867‑4132 (Spanish) to help make communication 
easier. This member handbook is also available in large print/CD.

--- Page 6 ---
Page 6 | 2025 Healthfirst Member Handbook
Eligibility for Enrollment in the MLTC Plan
The MLTC plan is for people who have Medicaid. You are eligible to join the 
MLTC plan if you:
1. Are age 18 and older,
2. Reside in the plan’s service area, which is New York (Manhattan), the Bronx, 
Kings (Brooklyn), Queens, Richmond (Staten Island), Nassau or Westchester counties,
3. Have Medicaid, 
4. Have Medicaid only and are eligible for nursing home level of care, 
5. Capable at the time of enrollment of returning to or remaining in your home and 
community without jeopardy to your health and safety, and
6. Are expected to require at least one of the following Community Based Long Term 
Services and Supports (CBLTSS) covered by the MLTC Plan for a continuous period of 
more than 120 days from the date of enrollment:
a. Nursing services in the home
b. Therapies in the home
c. Home health aide services
d. Personal care services in the home
e. Adult day health care, (ADHC), which includes AIDS ADHC
f. Private duty nursing; or
g. Consumer Directed Personal Assistance Services (CDPAS)
The coverage explained in this Handbook becomes effective on the date of 
your enrollment in Senior Health Partners MLTC plan. Enrollment in the MLTC 
plan is voluntary.

--- Page 7 ---
Senior Health Partners Managed Long Term Care (MLTC) plan 
Page 7
New York Independent Assessor Program 
(NYIAP) ‑ Initial Assessment Process
The New York Independent Assessment Process (“NYIAP”) manages the initial 
assessment process. NYIAP will start the expedited initial assessments (requests where 
a quick turnaround time is needed) at a later date. The initial assessment process 
includes completing the:
• 
Community Health Assessment (CHA): The CHA is used to see if you need personal 
care and/or consumer directed personal assistance services (PCS/CDPAS) and are 
eligible for enrollment in a Managed Long Term Care plan.
• 
Clinical appointment and Practitioner Order (PO): The PO documents your clinical 
appointment and indicates that you:
 ◦
have a need for help with daily activities, and
 ◦
that your medical condition is stable so that you may receive PCS and/or 
CDPAS in your home.
The NYIAP will schedule both the CHA and clinical appointment. The CHA will be 
completed by a trained registered nurse (RN). After the CHA, a clinician from the NYIAP 
will complete a clinical appointment and PO a few days later.
Senior Health Partners will use the CHA and PO outcomes to determine what kind 
of help you need and create your plan of care. If your plan of care proposes PCS 
and/or CDPAS for more than 12 hours per day on average, a separate review by the 
NYIAP Independent Review Panel (IRP) will be needed. The IRP is a panel of medical 
professionals who will review your CHA, PO, plan of care, and any other medical 
documentation. If more information is needed, someone on the panel may examine 
you or discuss your needs with you. The IRP will make a recommendation to Senior 
Health Partners about whether the plan of care meets your needs.
Once NYIAP completes the initial assessment steps and determines you are eligible for 
Medicaid Managed Long Term Care, you then choose which Managed Long Term Care 
plan to enroll with.

--- Page 8 ---
Page 8 | 2025 Healthfirst Member Handbook
Enrollment
Enrolling in Senior Health Partners is voluntary. If you want to join, you (or someone on 
your behalf) can call Senior Health Partners. Your Medicaid eligibility must be reviewed 
and approved by the NYC Human Resources Administration or Local Department 
of Social Services. If you do not currently have Medicaid, we will help you apply for 
Medicaid coverage.
After confirming eligibility, we will give you a call to provide you with more information 
about the plan and will schedule a telephonic or in‑home assessment for one of our 
registered nurses. We will also ask you for information about your healthcare needs. 
Our Clinical Eligibility Nurse will confirm consent to let them assess your 
healthcare needs. 
Our nurse will ask you to provide written consent that lets your healthcare providers give 
us your medical information, where applicable. Our Clinical Eligibility Nurse will conduct 
a telehealth or in‑home assessment after the NYIAP assessment to: 
• 
Identify your healthcare needs (also called an “initial assessment”); and
• 
Talk about services you may need.
After the initial assessment, our nurse will ask you to sign the Enrollment Agreement 
Transfer Attestation. By signing the Enrollment Agreement Transfer Attestation, you 
are agreeing to: 
• 
The initial Person‑Centered Service Plan (PCSP), described below, offered by 
Senior Health Partners. 
• 
Receive all covered services from Senior Health Partners and our network providers. 
• 
Comply with Senior Health Partners’ terms and conditions, as described in 
this handbook. 
Before your enrollment date, we may contact you to get more information to help 
create your plan of care. You should respond as soon as you can, so you can enroll as 
soon as possible and begin receiving services. After this, you will get your membership 
letter and a Senior Health Partners Member ID card. Your enrollment effective date will 
start on the first of the month following the successful completion of the enrollment 
process. After this, your Care Team will call you to further discuss your first PCSP and 
answer any questions you have. Your Care Team will also ask you, your provider, and 
your family/caregivers to help with any future changes in your PCSP. 

--- Page 9 ---
Senior Health Partners Managed Long Term Care (MLTC) plan 
Page 9
Withdrawal of Enrollment 
You can ask Senior Health Partners verbally or in writing to withdraw your application 
or enrollment agreement by noon (12pm) on the 20th day of the month before your 
enrollment date. If your request is received after the 20th of the month, you will be 
disenrolled from Senior Health Partners on the first day of the next month. You may 
also contact New York State Medicaid Choice directly to withdraw your application or 
enrollment agreement.
If you want to transfer to another MLTC Medicaid Plan, you can try Senior Health 
Partners for up to 90 days. You may leave Senior Health Partners and join another health 
plan at any time during that 90 day period. If you do not leave in the first 90 days, you 
must remain enrolled in Senior Health Partners for nine (9) more months, unless you 
have a good reason (good cause). Some examples of good cause include: 
• 
You move out of our service area. 
• 
You, the plan, and your county Department of Social Services or the New York State 
Department of Health all agree that leaving Senior Health Partners is best for you. 
• 
Your current home care provider does not work with our plan. 
• 
We have not been able to provide services to you as we are required to under our 
contract with the State. 
If you qualify, you can change to another type of managed long‑term care plan like 
Medicaid Advantage Plus (MAP) or Programs of All‑Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE) 
at any time without good cause. To change plans: Call New York Medicaid Choice at 
1‑800‑505‑5678. The New York Medicaid Choice counselors can help you change 
health plans. It could take between two (2) and six (6) weeks for your enrollment into a 
new plan to become active. You will get a notice from New York Medicaid Choice telling 
you the date you will be enrolled in your new plan. Senior Health Partners will provide 
the care you need until then. Call New York Medicaid Choice if you need to ask for 
faster action because the time it takes to transfer plans will be harmful to your health. 
You can also ask them for faster action if you have told New York Medicaid Choice that 
you did not agree to enroll in Senior Health Partners.

--- Page 10 ---
Page 10 | 2025 Healthfirst Member Handbook
Plan Member (ID) Card 
Your Senior Health Partners identification card (Member ID card) will be mailed 
to you. You will receive your Senior Health Partners member ID Card within 14 days 
of your effective enrollment date. Please verify that all information is correct on your 
card. Be sure to always carry your ID card with you along with your Medicaid card. 
You need to show it to your provider. If your card becomes lost or stolen, please 
contact Member Services at 1‑800‑633‑9717 (TTY, 1‑888‑542‑3821 for English; 
1‑888‑867‑4132 for Spanish).                                      
Front of Member ID Card
Back of Member ID Card

--- Page 11 ---
Senior Health Partners Managed Long Term Care (MLTC) plan 
Page 11
Services Covered By The 
Senior Health Partners MLTC Plan
Care Management Services
As a valued member of our plan, you will be assigned a care manager who is a 
healthcare professional – usually a NYS registered nurse or a social worker to help 
support and manage your care needs. The Care Management team may also consist of 
a behavioral health professional, Registered Dietitian, and/or a Care Coordinator. Your 
care management team will work with you, your family, your Primary Care Physician 
(PCP), and any other individuals you want involved in your care. Your care team 
members are available to you if you have any issues. They are here to help you decide 
what services are most important to help you remain safe at home. They will arrange 
appointments and coordinate with your care providers. Your care management team 
will also help you manage your chronic health conditions.
You, or anyone you choose to represent you, will work with your care management 
team to guide the development of a personalized Person‑Centered Service Plan 
(PCSP). The PCSP will include your goals, objectives, and services you need to meet 
your healthcare needs. You will receive an in‑person Care Management visit every 
six (6) months that includes a review of your needs and services. It is important that 
you work with your Physician to make sure that you get Doctor’s Orders yearly and 
send to Healthfirst. This is needed for you to get Personal Care Services (PCS) and/or 
Consumer Directed Personal Care Services (CDPAS). You will receive a comprehensive 
assessment by a registered nurse annually, or if your condition changes. 
To monitor your needs, it is important for your Care Management Team to talk to you 
monthly or more frequently if needed. If you have any questions, please feel free to call 
Member Services, who can address any questions you may have and, connect you 
to your Care Management team, if needed. Member services will respond to your calls 
24 hours a day, seven days a week. 

--- Page 12 ---
Page 12 | 2025 Healthfirst Member Handbook
Additional Covered Services 
Because you have Medicaid and qualify for MLTC, Senior Health Partners will arrange 
and pay for the extra health and social services described below. You may get these 
services so long as they are medically necessary, that is, they are needed to prevent 
or treat your illness or disability. Your care manager will help identify the services and 
providers you need. In some cases, you may need a referral or an order from your 
doctor to get these services. You must get these services from the providers who are in 
Senior Health Partners’ network. If you cannot find a provider in our plan, please contact 
Member Services, who will help you find another provider.
The following treatments and services must be approved (prior authorization is required) 
before you get them:
• 
Outpatient Rehabilitation 
(includes Physical, Occupational and Speech therapies)
• 
Personal Care Services 
(such as assistance with bathing, eating, dressing, toileting, and walking)
• 
Home Health Care Services Not Covered by Medicare including nursing, 
home health aide, occupational, physical, and speech therapies
• 
Nutrition
• 
Medical Social Services
• 
Home Delivered Meals and/or meals in a group setting such as a day care
• 
Social Day Care
• 
Private Duty Nursing
• 
Dental
 ◦
Starting January 31, 2024, Senior Health Partners, Managed Long‑Term Care 
(MLTC) plan will be covering crowns and root canals in certain circumstances so 
that you can keep more of your natural teeth. In addition, replacement dentures 
and implants will need a recommendation from your dentist to determine if they 
are medically necessary. This will make it easier for you to access these dental 
services. You must use an in‑network dentist.
• 
Social/Environmental Supports (such as home maintenance tasks, 
homemaker/chore services, housing improvements, and respite care). 
 ◦
Home maintenance tasks and housing improvements do not include permanent 
and/or structural changes to someone’s residence. These are not covered. 
Limitations and exclusions apply to social and environmental supports. 
• 
Personal Emergency Response System (PERS)
• 
Adult Day Health Care
• 
Nursing Home Care not covered by Medicare 
(provided you are eligible for institutional Medicaid)
• 
Audiology (Hearing Services and Hearing Aids)

--- Page 13 ---
Senior Health Partners Managed Long Term Care (MLTC) plan 
Page 13
• 
Durable Medical Equipment (DME)
• 
Medical Supplies
• 
Prosthetics and Orthotics
• 
Optometry/Eyeglasses
• 
Consumer Directed Personal Assistance Services (CDPAS)
• 
Podiatry
• 
Respiratory Therapy
Starting January 1, 2025, you can connect to organizations in your community that 
provide services to help with housing, transportation, and care management at no cost 
to you, through a regional Social Care Network (SCN).
• 
Through this SCN, you can meet with a Social Care Navigator who can check your 
eligibility for services that can help with your health and well‑being. They will ask you 
some questions to see where you might need some extra support.
• 
If you qualify for services, the Social Care Navigator can work with you to get the 
support you need. You may qualify for more than one service, depending on your 
situation. These services may include:
 ◦
Housing and utilities support: 
 ▪
Installing home modifications like ramps, handrails, and grab bars to make 
your home accessible and safe. 
 ▪
Repairing and fixing water leaks to prevent mold from growing in your home. 
 ▪
Sealing holes and cracks to prevent pests from entering your home.
 ▪
Providing an air conditioner, heater, humidifier, or dehumidifier to help 
improve ventilation in your home.
 ▪
Helping you find and apply for safe and stable housing in the community.
 ◦
Transportation services:
 ▪
Helping you with access to public or private transportation to places approved 
by the SCN, such as going to a job interview, parenting classes, housing court 
to prevent eviction, and city or state department offices to obtain important 
documents.
 ◦
Care management services:
 ▪
Getting help with finding a job or job training program, applying for public 
benefits, managing your finances, and more.
 ▪
Getting connected to services like childcare, counseling, crisis intervention, 
health homes program, and more.
If you are interested, please call Senior Health Partners Member Services at 
1‑800‑633‑9717 (for TTY services call 1‑888‑542‑3821 for English or 1‑888‑867‑4132 
for Spanish) and we will connect you to a SCN in your area. The Social Care Navigator 
will verify your eligibility, tell you more about these services, and help you get 
connected to them.

--- Page 14 ---
Page 14 | 2025 Healthfirst Member Handbook
How to Obtain Covered Services
Most of the covered services that you get must be approved by your Care Team. 
The following services also require a doctor’s order and must be approved by 
your Care Team: Consumer Directed Personal Assistance Services (CDPAS), 
home healthcare, nursing home care, rehabilitative therapies, respiratory therapy, 
durable medical equipment, prosthetics, orthotics, and social and environmental 
supports. On a yearly basis, you must complete and submit a doctor’s order 
to Senior Health Partners for Personal Care Services and Consumer Directed 
Personal Assisted Services. 
If you need help getting any covered service, talk to any member of your Care Team. 
They can schedule an appointment with the provider.
Emergency or urgent care services do not have to be ordered by your provider or 
approved by your Care Team.
To submit a prior approval request, you or your provider may call Senior Health Partners 
Member Services at 1‑800‑633‑9717 (for TTY services call 1‑888‑542‑3821 for English 
or 1‑888‑867‑4132 for Spanish). You can also send your request in writing to: 
Healthfirst Member Services 
P.O. Box 5165 
New York, NY 10274‑5165
Limitations
Enteral formula and nutritional supplements are limited to individuals who cannot obtain 
nutrition through any other means, and to the following conditions:
1. tube‑fed individuals who cannot chew or swallow food and must obtain nutrition 
through formula via tube; and
2. individuals with rare inborn metabolic disorders requiring specific medical formulas 
to provide essential nutrients not available through any other means.
Coverage of certain inherited disease of amino acid and organic acid metabolism 
shall include modified solid food products that are low‑protein or which contain 
modified protein.
Nursing Home Care is covered for individuals who are considered a permanent 
placement for at least three (3) months. After 90 days, your Nursing Home Care 
may be covered through regular Medicaid, and you will be disenrolled from 
Senior Health Partners.

--- Page 15 ---
Senior Health Partners Managed Long Term Care (MLTC) plan 
Page 15
Getting Care Outside the Service Area
If you will be out of the Senior Health Partners service area for a while (a few days or 
more), you must call your Care Team. We’re available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week 
at: 1‑800‑633‑9717 (TTY 1‑888‑542‑3821 for English; 1‑888‑867‑4132 for Spanish). 
Your Care Team can manage your care for up to 30 days while you are away. During 
that time, we can help you with any issues you have about your care, and with getting 
other services. If you are out of the Senior Health Partners service area for more than 
30 days in a row (with or without telling us), we will have to start the disenrollment 
process. This will begin within five (5) business days of knowing you have been away 
from the service area for more than 30 days in a row.
Emergency Services
Emergency Service means a sudden onset of a condition that poses a serious threat 
to your health. For medical emergencies, please call 911. As noted above, prior 
authorization is not needed for emergency service. However, you should notify Senior 
Health Partners within 24 hours of the emergency. You may be in need of long term 
care services that can only be provided through Senior Health Partners.
If you are hospitalized, a family member or other caregiver should contact Senior Health 
Partners within 24 hours of admission. Your Care Manager will suspend your home care 
services and cancel other appointments, as necessary. Please be sure to notify your 
primary care physician or hospital discharge planner to contact Senior Health Partners 
so that we may work with them to plan your care upon discharge from the hospital.
Transitional Care Procedures
New members in Senior Health Partners may continue an ongoing course of 
treatment for a transitional period of up to 60 days from enrollment with a non‑network 
healthcare provider, if the provider accepts payment at the plan rate, adheres 
to Senior Health Partners’ quality assurance and other policies, and provides medical 
information about the care to Senior Health Partners.
If your provider leaves the network, an ongoing course of treatment may be continued 
for a transitional period of up to 90 days if the provider accepts payment at the plan rate, 
adheres to plan quality assurance and other policies, and provides medical information 
about the care to the plan.

--- Page 16 ---
Page 16 | 2025 Healthfirst Member Handbook
Money Follows The Person 
(MFP)/Open Doors
This section will explain the services and supports that are available through the 
Money Follows the Person (MFP)/Open Doors program. MFP/Open Doors is a program 
that can help you move from a nursing home back into your home or residence in the 
community. You may qualify for MFP/Open Doors if you:
• 
Have lived in a nursing home for three months or longer
• 
Have health needs that can be met through services in their community
MFP/Open Doors has Transition Specialists and Peers who can meet with you in the 
nursing home and talk with you about moving back to the community. Transition 
Specialists and Peers are different from Care Managers and Discharge Planners. 
They can help you by:
• 
Giving you information about services and supports in the community
• 
Finding services offered in the community to help you be independent
• 
Visiting or calling you after you move to make sure you have what you need at home
For more information about MFP/Open Doors, or to set up a visit from a Transition 
Specialist or Peer, please call the New York Association on Independent Living at 
1‑844‑545‑7108, or email mfp@health.ny.gov. You can also visit MFP/Open Doors on 
the web at www.health.ny.gov/mfp or www.ilny.org.
Medicaid Services Not Covered By Our Plan
There are some Medicaid services that Senior Health Partners does not cover but 
may be covered by regular Medicaid. You can get these services from any provider 
who accepts Medicaid by using your Medicaid Benefit Card. Call Member Services at 
1‑800‑633‑9717 (for TTY services, call 1‑888‑542‑3821 for English or 1‑888‑867‑4132 
for Spanish), if you have a question about whether a benefit is covered by Senior Health 
Partners or Medicaid. Some of the services covered by Medicaid using your Medicaid 
Benefit Card include:
Pharmacy
Most prescription and non‑prescription drugs, as well as compounded prescriptions, 
are covered by regular Medicaid or Medicare Part D if you have Medicare.

--- Page 17 ---
Senior Health Partners Managed Long Term Care (MLTC) plan 
Page 17
Certain Mental Health Services, including:
• 
Intensive Psychiatric Rehabilitation Treatment
• 
Day Treatment
• 
Case Management for Seriously and Persistently Mentally Ill (sponsored by state 
or local mental health units)
• 
Partial Hospital Care not covered by Medicare
• 
Rehabilitation Services to those in community homes or in family‑based treatment
• 
Continuing Day Treatment
• 
Assertive Community Treatment
• 
Personalized Recovery Oriented Services
Certain Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities Services, including:
• 
Long‑term therapies
• 
Day Treatment
• 
Medicaid Service Coordination
• 
Services received under the Home and Community Based Services Waiver
Other Medicaid Services including:
• 
Methadone Treatment
• 
Directly Observed Therapy for TB (Tuberculosis)
• 
HIV COBRA Case Management
• 
Family Planning
• 
Certain medically necessary ovulation‑enhancing drugs, when criteria are met.
• 
Non‑Emergency Medical Transportation
 ◦
Non‑emergency medical transportation is arranged by the New York State 
Department of Health Statewide Transportation Broker, Medical Answering 
Services (MAS). To arrange this transportation, please contact MAS at least 3 days 
before your medical appointment and provide the details of your appointment 
(date, time, address, the name of your provider and if you need a assistance 
getting to the vehicle) and your Medicaid identification number. You can contact 
MAS to schedule a trip or to file a complaint by:
 ▪
Creating an online account at medanswering.com and booking a trip on 
the portal or
 ▪
Members residing in New York City, Nassau, and Westchester counties should 
dial 1‑844‑666‑6270.
 ▪
Members in all other counties should dial 1‑866‑932‑7740.

--- Page 18 ---
Page 18 | 2025 Healthfirst Member Handbook
Services Not Covered By 
Senior Health Partners OR Medicaid
You must pay for services that are not covered by Senior Health Partners or by Medicaid 
if your provider tells you in advance that these services are not covered AND you agree 
to pay for them. 
Examples of services not covered by Senior Health Partners or Medicaid:
• 
Cosmetic surgery if not medically needed
• 
Personal and Comfort items
• 
Services of a Provider that is not part of the plan (unless Senior Health Partners sends 
you to that provider for that service)
If you have any questions, call Member Services at 1‑800‑633‑9717. For TTY services, 
call 1‑888‑542‑3821 for English or 1‑888‑867‑4132 for Spanish. 
Service Authorizations, Actions, and 
Action Appeals
When you ask for approval of a treatment or service, it is called a 
service authorization request.
To submit a service authorization request, you or your provider may call Senior Health 
Partners’ Member Services at 1‑800‑633‑9717 (for TTY services call 1‑888‑542‑3821 for 
English or 1‑888‑867‑4132 for Spanish). You can also send your request in writing to: 
Healthfirst Member Services 
P.O. Box 5165 
New York, NY 10274‑5165
We will authorize services in a certain amount and for a specific period of time. 
This is called an authorization period.
Prior Authorization
Some covered services require prior authorization (approval in advance) from 
Senior Health Partners’ Utilization Management Department before you receive them or 
in order to be able to continue receiving them. You or someone you authorize can ask 
for this. The following treatments and services must be approved before you get them:

--- Page 19 ---
Senior Health Partners Managed Long Term Care (MLTC) plan 
Page 19
• 
Outpatient Rehabilitation (includes Physical, Occupational and Speech therapies)
• 
Personal Care Services (such as assistance with bathing, eating, dressing, 
toileting, and walking)
• 
Home Health Care Services Not Covered by Medicare including nursing, home 
health aide, occupational, physical, and speech therapies
• 
Nutrition
• 
Medical Social Services
• 
Home‑Delivered Meals and/or meals in a group setting such as a day care
• 
Social Day Care
• 
Private Duty Nursing
• 
Dental
 ◦
Starting January 31, 2024, Senior Health Partners, Managed Long‑Term Care 
(MLTC) plan will be covering crowns and root canals in certain circumstances so 
that you can keep more of your natural teeth. In addition, replacement dentures 
and implants will only need a recommendation from your dentist to determine 
if they are medically necessary. This will make it easier for you to access these 
dental services. You must use an in‑network dentist. 
• 
Social/Environmental Supports (such as home maintenance tasks, 
homemaker/chore services, housing improvements, and respite care). 
 ◦
Home maintenance tasks and housing improvements do not include permanent 
and/or structural changes to someone’s residence. These are not covered. 
Limitations and exclusions apply to social and environmental supports). 
• 
Personal Emergency Response System (PERS)
• 
Adult Day Health Care
• 
Nursing Home Care not covered by Medicare (provided you are eligible for 
institutional Medicaid)
• 
Audiology (Hearing Services and Hearing Aids)
• 
Durable Medical Equipment (DME)
• 
Medical Supplies
• 
Prosthetics and Orthotics
• 
Optometry/Eyeglasses
• 
Consumer Directed Personal Assistance Services (CDPAS)
• 
Podiatry
• 
Respiratory Therapy

--- Page 20 ---
Page 20 | 2025 Healthfirst Member Handbook
To get an authorization, you or your provider must call Member Services at 
1‑800‑633‑9717 (for TTY services call 1‑888‑542‑3821 for English or 1‑888‑867‑4132 
for Spanish), or write to us at:
Healthfirst Utilization Management 
P.O. Box 5166 
New York, NY 10274‑5166
Concurrent Review
You can also ask Senior Health Partners’ Utilization Management Department for an 
increase in the services that you are getting now. This is called concurrent review. 
This can be done by contacting Member Services: 1‑800‑633‑9717 (for TTY services 
call 1‑888‑542‑3821 for English or 1‑888‑867‑4132 for Spanish).
Retrospective Review
Sometimes we will conduct a review of the care you are getting to see if you still need 
the care. We may also review other treatments and services you already received. This is 
called retrospective review. We will tell you if we do these reviews.
What happens after we get your service authorization request?
The plan has a review team to be sure you get the services we promise. Doctors and 
nurses are on the review team. Their job is to be sure the treatment or service you asked 
for is medically needed and right for you. They do this by checking your treatment plan 
against acceptable medical standards.
We may decide to deny a service authorization request or to approve it for an amount 
that is less than what you requested. These decisions will be made by a qualified 
healthcare professional. If we decide that the requested service is not medically 
necessary, the decision will be made by a clinical peer reviewer, who may be a doctor, 
a nurse or a health care professional who typically provides the care you requested. 
You can request the specific medical standards, called clinical review criteria, used 
to make decisions for actions related to medical necessity.
After we get your request, we will review it under a standard or fast track process. 
You or your doctor can ask for a fast track review if it is believed that a delay will cause 
serious harm to your health. If your request for a fast track review is denied, we will tell 
you and your request will be handled under the standard review process. In all cases, we 
will review your request as fast as your medical condition requires us to do so, but no 
later than indicated below.

--- Page 21 ---
Senior Health Partners Managed Long Term Care (MLTC) plan 
Page 21
Timeframes for prior authorization requests
• 
Standard review: We will make a decision about your request within 3 work days of 
when we have all the information we need, but you will hear from us no later than 
14 days after we receive your request. We will tell you by the 14th day if we need 
more information.
• 
Fast track review: We will make a decision and you will hear from us within 72 hours. 
We will tell you within 72 hours if we need more information.
Timeframes for concurrent review requests
• 
Standard review: We will make a decision within 1 business day from when we have 
all the information we need, but you will hear from us no later than 14 days after we 
received your request.
• 
Fast track review: We will make a decision within 1 business day from when we have 
all the information we need. You will hear from us within 72 hours after we receive 
your request. We will tell you within 1 business day if we need more information.
If we need more information to make either a standard or fast track decision about 
your service request, the timeframes above can be extended up to 14 days. We will:
• 
Write and tell you what information is needed. If your request is in a fast track review, 
we will call you right away and send a written notice later.
• 
Tell you why the delay is in your best interest.
• 
Make a decision as quickly as we can when we receive the necessary information, 
but no later than 14 days from the day we asked for more information.
You, your provider, or someone you authorize may also ask us to take more time 
to make a decision. This may be because you have more information to give the plan 
to help decide your case. This can be done by calling 1‑800‑633‑9717 (for TTY services 
call 1‑888‑542‑3821 for English or 1‑888‑867‑4132 for Spanish) or writing.
You or someone you authorize can file a complaint with Senior Health Partners if you 
don’t agree with our decision to take more time to review your request. You or someone 
you authorize can also file a complaint about the review time with the New York State 
Department of Health by calling 1‑866‑712‑7197.
If our answer is YES to part or all of what you asked for, we will authorize the service or 
give you the item that you asked for.
If our answer is NO to part or all of what you asked for, we will send you a written 
notice that explains why we said no. See How do I File an Appeal of an Action? which 
explains how to make an appeal if you do not agree with our decision.

--- Page 22 ---
Page 22 | 2025 Healthfirst Member Handbook
What is an Action?
When Senior Health Partners denies or limits services requested by you or your provider; 
denies a request for a referral; decides that a requested service is not a covered benefit; 
restricts, reduces, suspends, or terminates services that we already authorized; denies 
payment for services; doesn’t provide timely services; or doesn’t make complaint or 
appeal determinations within the required timeframes, those are considered plan 
“actions.” An action is subject to appeal. (See How do I File an Appeal of an Action? 
below for more information.)
Timing of Notice of Action
If we decide to deny or limit services you requested or decide not to pay for all or part 
of a covered service, we will send you a notice when we make our decision. If we 
are proposing to restrict, reduce, suspend, or terminate a service that is authorized, 
our letter will be sent at least 10 days before we intend to change the service.
Contents of the Notice of Action
Any notice we send to you about an action will:
• 
Explain the action we have taken or intend to take;
• 
Cite the reasons for the action including the clinical rationale, if any;
• 
Describe your right to file an appeal with us (including whether you may also have a 
right to the State’s external appeal process);
• 
Describe how to file an internal appeal and the circumstances under which you can 
request that we speed up (expedite) our review of your internal appeal;
• 
Describe the availability of the clinical review criteria relied upon in making the 
decision, if the involved issues of medical necessity or whether the treatment or 
service in question was experimental or investigational; and
• 
Describe the information, if any, that must be provided by you and/or your provider 
in order for us to render a decision on appeal.
The notice will also tell you about your right to an appeal and a Fair Hearing:
• 
It will explain the difference between an appeal and a Fair Hearing;
• 
It will say that that you must file an appeal before asking for a Fair Hearing; and
• 
It will explain how to ask for an appeal.
If we are reducing, suspending, or terminating an authorized service the notice will also 
tell you about your rights to have your services continued while your appeal is decided. 
To have your services continued you must ask for an appeal within 10 days of the date 
on the notice or the intended effective date of the proposed action, whichever is later.

--- Page 23 ---
Senior Health Partners Managed Long Term Care (MLTC) plan 
Page 23
How do I File an Appeal of an Action?
If you do not agree with an action that we have taken, you may appeal. When you file 
an appeal, it means that we must look again at the reason for our action to decide if we 
were correct. You can file an appeal of an action with the plan orally or in writing. When 
the plan sends you a letter about an action it is taking (like denying or limiting services, 
or not paying for services), you must file your appeal request within 60 days of the date 
on the notice. If we are reducing, suspending, or terminating and authorized service 
and you want your services to continue while your appeal is decided, you must ask for 
an appeal within 10 days of the date on the notice or the intended effective date of the 
proposed action, whichever is later.
How do I Contact my Plan to File an Appeal?
We can be reached by calling 1‑800‑633‑9717 (for TTY services call 1‑888‑542‑3821 
for English or 1‑888‑867‑4132 for Spanish) or writing to: 
Senior Health Partners Plan
Attn: Appeals and Grievances
P.O. Box 5166
New York, NY 10274‑5166
The person who receives your appeal will record it, and appropriate staff will oversee the 
review of the appeal. We will send a notice telling you that we received your appeal, and 
how we will handle it. Your appeal will be reviewed by knowledgeable clinical staff who 
were not involved in the plan’s initial decision or action that you are appealing.
For Some Actions, You May Request to Continue Service During the 
Appeal Process
If you are appealing a restriction, reduction, suspension, or termination of services you 
are currently authorized to receive, we must continue your service if you ask for a plan 
appeal no later than 10 days from the date on the notice or the intended effective date 
of the proposed action, whichever is later. To find out how to ask for a plan appeal, and 
to ask for aid to continue, see ”How do I File an Appeal of an Action?” above.
Although you may request a continuation of services, if the plan appeal is not decided 
in your favor, we may require you to pay for these services if they were provided only 
because you asked to continue to receive them while your case was being reviewed.

--- Page 24 ---
Page 24 | 2025 Healthfirst Member Handbook
How Long Will It Take the Plan to Decide My Appeal of an Action?
Unless your appeal is fast tracked, we will review your appeal of the action taken by 
us as a standard appeal. We will send you a written decision as quickly as your health 
condition requires, but no later than 30 days from the day we receive an appeal. 
The review period can be increased up to 14 days if you request an extension or we 
need more information, and the delay is in your best interest. During our review you will 
have a chance to present your case in person and in writing. We will also send you your 
records that are part of the appeal review.
We will send you a notice about the decision we made about your appeal. This notice 
will identify the decision we made and the date we reached that decision.
If we reverse our decision to deny or limit requested services, or restrict, reduce, 
suspend, or terminate services, and services were not furnished while your appeal 
was pending, we will provide you with the disputed services as quickly as your 
health condition requires. In some cases, you may request a “fast track” appeal.  
(See “Fast Track Appeal Process” section below.)
Fast Track Appeal Process
We will always expedite our review if the appeal is about your request for more of a 
service you are already receiving. If you or your provider feels that taking the time for 
a standard appeal could result in a serious problem to your health or life, you may ask 
for a fast track review of your appeal of the action. We will respond to you with our 
decision within 2 business days after we receive all necessary information. In no event 
will the time for issuing our decision be more than 72 hours after we receive your 
appeal. The review period can be increased up to 14 days if you request an extension 
or we need more information, and the delay is in your best interest.
If we do not agree with your request to expedite your appeal, we will make our best 
efforts to contact you in person to let you know that we have denied your request for 
a fast track appeal and will handle it as a standard appeal. Also, we will send you written 
notice of our decision to deny your request for a fast track appeal within 2 days of 
receiving your request.
If the Plan Denies My Appeal, What Can I Do?
If our decision about your appeal is not totally in your favor, the notice you receive will 
explain your right to request a Medicaid Fair Hearing from New York State and how 
to obtain a Fair Hearing, who can appear at the Fair Hearing on your behalf, and for 
some appeals, your right to request to receive services while the Hearing is pending 
and how to make the request.

--- Page 25 ---
Senior Health Partners Managed Long Term Care (MLTC) plan 
Page 25
Note: You must request a Fair Hearing within 120 calendar days after the date 
on the Final Adverse Determination Notice. If we deny your appeal because of 
issues of medical necessity or because the service in question was experimental or 
investigational, the notice will also explain how to ask New York State for an “external 
appeal” of our decision.
State Fair Hearings
If we deny your plan appeal or fail to provide a Final Adverse Determination notice 
within the timeframes under “How Long Will It Take the Plan to Decide My Appeal 
of an Action?” above, you may request a Fair Hearing from New York State. The Fair 
Hearing decision can overrule our decision. You must request a Fair Hearing within 
120 calendar days of the date we sent you the Final Adverse Determination notice.
If we are reducing, suspending, or terminating an authorized service and you 
want to make sure that your services continue pending the Fair Hearing, you must 
make your Fair Hearing request within 10 days of the date on the Final Adverse 
Determination notice.
Your benefits will continue until you withdraw the Fair Hearing or the State Fair Hearing 
Officer issues a hearing decision that is not in your favor, whichever occurs first.
If the State Fair Hearing Officer reverses our decision, we must make sure that you 
receive the disputed services promptly, and as soon as your health condition requires. 
If you received the disputed services while your appeal was pending, we will be 
responsible for payment for the covered services ordered by the Fair Hearing Officer.
Although you may request to continue services while you are waiting for your 
Fair Hearing decision, if your Fair Hearing is not decided in your favor, you may be 
responsible for paying for the services that were the subject of the Fair Hearing.
You can file a State Fair Hearing by contacting the Office of Temporary and Disability 
Assistance (OTDA):
  Online Request Form:  
Request Hearing | Fair Hearings | OTDA (ny.gov)
  Mail a Printable Request Form: 
NYS Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance Office of Administrative Hearings 
Managed Care Hearing Unit 
P.O. Box 22023 
Albany, New York 12201‑2023
  Fax a Printable Request Form: 1‑518‑473‑6735

--- Page 26 ---
Page 26 | 2025 Healthfirst Member Handbook
  Request by Telephone: 
Standard Fair Hearing line – 1‑800‑342‑3334 
Emergency Fair Hearing line – 1‑800‑205‑0110 
TTY line – 711 (request that the operator call 1‑877‑502‑6155
 
 Request in Person: 
New York City – 5 Beaver Street, New York, NY 10004 
Albany – 40 North Pearl Street, Albany, New York 12243
For more information on how to request a Fair Hearing, please visit: 
http://otda.ny.gov/hearings/request/
State External Appeals
If we deny your appeal because we determine the service is not medically necessary 
or is experimental or investigational, you may ask for an external appeal from 
New York State. The external appeal is decided by reviewers who do not work for us 
or New York State. These reviewers are qualified people approved by New York State. 
You do not have to pay for an external appeal.
When we make a decision to deny an appeal for lack of medical necessity or on 
the basis that the service is experimental or investigational, we will provide you with 
information about how to file an external appeal, including a form on which to file 
the external appeal along with our decision to deny an appeal. If you want an external 
appeal, you must file the form with the New York State Department of Financial Services 
within four months from the date we denied your appeal.
Your external appeal will be decided within 30 days. More time (up to 5 business 
days) may be needed if the external appeal reviewer asks for more information. 
The reviewer will tell you and us of the final decision within two business days after 
the decision is made.
You can get a faster decision if your doctor can say that a delay will cause serious harm 
to your health. This is called a fast track external appeal. The external appeal reviewer 
will decide a fast track appeal in 72 hours or less. The reviewer will tell you and us the 
decision right away by phone or fax. Later, a letter will be sent that tells you the decision.
You may ask for both a Fair Hearing and an external appeal. If you ask for a Fair 
Hearing and an external appeal, the decision of the Fair Hearing officer will be the 
“one that counts.”

--- Page 27 ---
Senior Health Partners Managed Long Term Care (MLTC) plan 
Page 27
Complaints and Complaint Appeals
Senior Health Partners will try its best to deal with your concerns or issues as quickly 
as possible and to your satisfaction. You may use either our complaint process or our 
appeal process, depending on what kind of problem you have.
There will be no change in your services or the way you are treated by Senior Health 
Partners staff or a healthcare provider because you file a complaint or an appeal. 
We will maintain your privacy. We will give you any help you may need to file a 
complaint or appeal. This includes providing you with interpreter services or help if you 
have vision and/or hearing problems. You may choose someone (like a relative or friend 
or a provider) to act for you.
To file a complaint, please call: 1‑800‑633‑9717 (for TTY services call 1‑888‑542‑3821 
for English or 1‑888‑867‑4132 for Spanish) or write to: 
Senior Health Partners Plan
Attn: Appeals and Grievances
P.O. Box 5166
New York, NY 10274‑5166
When you contact us, you will need to give us your name, address, telephone number, 
and the details of the problem.
What is a Complaint?
A complaint is any communication by you to us of dissatisfaction about the care and 
treatment you receive from our staff or providers of covered services. For example, 
if someone was rude to you, didn’t show up, or you do not like the quality of care or 
services you have received from us, you can file a complaint with us.
The Complaint Process
You may file a complaint orally or in writing with us. The person who receives your 
complaint will record it, and appropriate plan staff will oversee the review of the 
complaint. We will send you a letter telling you that we received your complaint and a 
description of our review process. We will review your complaint and give you a written 
answer within one of two timeframes.
1. If a delay would significantly increase the risk to your health, we will decide within 
48 hours after receipt of necessary information, but the process must be completed 
within 7 days of the receipt of the complaint.

--- Page 28 ---
Page 28 | 2025 Healthfirst Member Handbook
2. For all other types of complaints, we will notify you of our decision within 45 days of 
receipt of necessary information, but the process must be completed within 60 days 
of the receipt of the complaint. The review period can be increased up to 14 days if 
you request it or if we need more information and the delay is in your interest.
Our answer will describe what we found when we reviewed your complaint and our 
decision about your complaint.
How do I Appeal a Complaint Decision?
If you are not satisfied with the decision, we make concerning your complaint, you 
may request a second review of your issue by filing a complaint appeal. You must file a 
complaint appeal orally or in writing. It must be filed within 60 business days of receipt 
of our initial decision about your complaint. Once we receive your appeal, we will 
send you a written acknowledgement within 15 business days telling you the name, 
address and telephone number of the individual we have designated to respond to your 
appeal. All complaint appeals will be conducted by appropriate professionals, including 
healthcare professionals for complaints involving clinical matters, who were not involved 
in the initial compliant decision.
For standard complaint appeals, we will make the appeal decision within 30 business 
days after we receive all necessary information to make our decision. If a delay in 
making our decision would significantly increase the risk to your health, we will use the 
fast track complaint appeal process. For fast track complaint appeals, we will make our 
appeal decision within 2 business days of receipt of necessary information. For both 
standard and fast track complaint appeals, we will provide you with written notice of our 
decision of your complaint appeal. The notice will include the detailed reasons for our 
decision and, in cases involving clinical matters, the clinical rationale for our decision.
Participant Ombudsman
The Participant Ombudsman, called the Independent Consumer Advocacy Network 
(ICAN), is an independent organization that provides free ombudsman services to long 
term care recipients in the state of New York. You can get free independent advice 
about your coverage, complaints, and appeal options. They can help you manage the 
appeal process. They can also provide support before you enroll in a MLTC plan like 
Senior Health Partners. This support includes unbiased health plan choice counseling 
and general plan related information. Contact ICAN to learn more about their services:
• 
Phone: 1‑844‑614‑8800 (TTY Relay Service: 711)
• 
Web: www.icannys.org | Email: ican@cssny.org

--- Page 29 ---
Senior Health Partners Managed Long Term Care (MLTC) plan 
Page 29
Disenrollment From Senior Health Partners 
MLTC Plan
You will not be disenrolled from the MLTC Plan based on any of the following reasons:
• 
high utilization of covered medical services
• 
an existing condition or a change in your health
• 
diminished mental capacity or uncooperative or disruptive behavior resulting from 
your special needs unless the behavior results in your becoming ineligible for MLTC.
Voluntary Disenrollment
You can ask to leave the Senior Health Partners at any time for any reason.
To request disenrollment, call 1‑800‑633‑9717 (TTY 1‑888‑542‑3821 for English: 
1‑888‑867‑4132 for Spanish) or you can write to us. The plan will provide you with 
written confirmation of your request. We will include a voluntary disenrollment form for 
you to sign and send back to us. It could take up to six weeks to process, depending on 
when your request is received. You may disenroll to regular Medicaid or join another 
health plan as long as you qualify. If you continue to require CBLTSS, like personal 
care, you must join another MLTC plan, Medicaid Managed Care plan or Home and 
Community Based Waiver program, in order to receive CBLTSS.
Transfers
You can try our plan for 90 days. You may leave Senior Health Partners and transfer and 
join another plan at any time during that time. If you do not leave in the first 90 days, 
you must stay in Senior Health Partners for nine more months, unless you have good 
reason (good cause).
• 
You move out of our service area.
• 
You, the plan, and your county Department of Social Services or the New York State 
Department of Health all agree that leaving Senior Health Partners is best for you.
• 
Your current home care provider does not work with our plan.
• 
We have not been able to provide services to you as we are required to under our 
contract with the State.
If you qualify, you can change to another type of managed long term care plan like 
Medicaid Advantage Plus (MAP) or Programs of All‑Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE) 
at any time without good cause.

--- Page 30 ---
Page 30 | 2025 Healthfirst Member Handbook
To change plans: Call New York Medicaid Choice at 1‑888‑401‑6582. The New York 
Medicaid Choice counselors can help you change health plans.
It could take between two and six weeks for your enrollment into a new plan 
to become active. You will get a notice from New York Medicaid Choice telling you the 
date you will be enrolled in your new plan. Senior Health Partners will provide the care 
you need until then.
Call New York Medicaid Choice if you need to ask for faster action because the time it 
takes to transfer plans will be harmful to your health. You can also ask them for faster 
action if you have told New York Medicaid Choice that you did not agree to enroll in 
Senior Health Partners.
Involuntary Disenrollment
An involuntary disenrollment is a disenrollment initiated by Senior Health Partners. 
If you do not request voluntary disenrollment, we must initiate involuntary disenrollment 
within five (5) business days from the date we know you meet any of involuntary 
disenrollment reasons.
You Will Have to Leave Senior Health Partners if you are:
• 
No longer Medicaid eligible.
• 
Permanently move out of Senior Health Partners’ service area.
• 
Out of the plan’s service area for more than 30 days in a row.
• 
Needing nursing home care but are not eligible for institutional Medicaid.
• 
Hospitalized or enter an Office of Mental Health, Office for People with 
Developmental Disability or Office of Alcoholism and Substance Abuse Services 
residential program for forty‑five (45) days in a row or longer.
• 
Assessed as no longer having a functional or clinical need for CBLTSS on 
a monthly basis.
• 
Medicaid only and no longer meet the nursing home level of care as determined 
using the designated assessment tool.
• 
Receiving Social Day Care as your only service.
• 
No longer require, and receive, at least one CBLTSS in each calendar month.
• 
At the point of any reassessment, while living in the community, you are determined 
to no longer demonstrate a functional or clinical need for CBLTSS.
• 
Incarcerated.
• 
Providing the plan with false information, otherwise deceive, or engage in fraudulent 
conduct with respect to any substantive aspect of your plan membership.
• 
Enrollee refused to cooperate or was unable to be reached to complete the 
required assessment.

--- Page 31 ---
Senior Health Partners Managed Long Term Care (MLTC) plan 
Page 31
We Can Ask You to Leave Senior Health Partners if you:
• 
or family member or informal caregiver or other person in the household engages 
in conduct or behavior that seriously impairs the plan’s ability to furnish services
• 
fail to pay or make arrangements to pay the amount money, as determined by 
the Local Department of Social Services, owed to the plan as spend‑down/surplus 
within 30 days after amount first becomes due. We will have made reasonable 
effort to collect.
Before being involuntarily disenrolled, Senior Health Partners will obtain the approval 
of New York Medicaid Choice (NYMC) or entity designated by the State. The effective 
date of disenrollment will be the first day of the month following the month in which 
you become ineligible for enrollment. If you continue to need CBLTSS, you will be 
required to choose another plan or you will be automatically assigned (auto‑assigned) 
to another plan.
Cultural And Linguistic Competency
Senior Health Partners honors your beliefs and is sensitive to cultural diversity. 
We respect your culture and cultural identity and work to eliminate cultural disparities. 
We maintain an inclusive culturally competent provider network and promote 
and ensure delivery of services in a culturally appropriate manner to all members. 
This includes but is not limited to those with limited English skills, diverse cultural 
and ethnic backgrounds, and diverse faith communities.

--- Page 32 ---
Page 32 | 2025 Healthfirst Member Handbook
Member Rights And Responsibilities
Senior Health Partners will make every effort to ensure that all members are treated 
with dignity and respect. At the time of enrollment, your Care Manager will explain 
your rights and responsibilities to you. If you require interpretation services, your 
Care Manager will arrange for them. Staff will make every effort to assist you with 
exercising your rights.
Member Rights
• 
You have the Right to receive medically necessary care.
• 
You have the Right to timely access to care and services.
• 
You have the Right to privacy about your medical record and when you get treatment.
• 
You have the Right to get information on available treatment options and alternatives 
presented in a manner and language you understand.
• 
You have the Right to get information in a language you understand; you can get 
oral translation services free of charge.
• 
You have the Right to get information necessary to give informed consent before the 
start of treatment.
• 
You have the Right to be treated with respect and dignity.
• 
You have the Right to request and get a copy of your medical records and ask that 
the records be amended or corrected.
• 
You have the Right to take part in decisions about your healthcare, including the right 
to refuse treatment.
• 
You have the Right to be free from any form of restraint or seclusion used as a means 
of coercion, discipline, convenience or retaliation.
• 
You have the Right to get care without regard to sex (including gender identity and 
status of being transgender), race, health status, color, age, national origin, sexual 
orientation, marital status or religion.
• 
You have the Right to be told where, when and how to get the services you need 
from your managed long term care plan, including how you can get covered 
benefits from out‑of‑network providers if they are not available in the plan network.
• 
You have the Right to complain to the New York State Department of Health or your 
Local Department of Social Services.
• 
You have the Right to use the New York State Fair Hearing System and/or 
a New York State External Appeal, where appropriate.
• 
You have the Right to appoint someone to speak for you about your 
care and treatment.
• 
You have the Right to seek assistance from the Participant Ombudsman program.

--- Page 33 ---
Senior Health Partners Managed Long Term Care (MLTC) plan 
Page 33
Member Responsibilities
• 
Receiving covered services through Senior Health Partners.
• 
Using Senior Health Partners network providers for covered services to the extent 
network providers are available.
• 
Obtaining prior authorization for covered services, except for pre‑approved covered 
services or in emergencies; Being seen by your physician, if a change in your 
health status occurs.
• 
Sharing complete and accurate health information with your health care providers.
• 
Informing Senior Health Partners staff of any changes in your health, and making it 
known if you do not understand or are unable to follow instructions.
• 
Following the plan of care recommended by the Senior Health Partners staff 
(with your input).
• 
Cooperating with and being respectful with the Senior Health Partners staff and 
not discriminating against Senior Health Partners staff because of race, color, 
national origin, religion, sex, age, mental or physical ability, sexual orientation, 
or marital status.
• 
Notifying Senior Health Partners within two business days of receiving non‑covered 
or non‑pre‑approved services.
• 
Notifying your Senior Health Partners health care team in advance whenever you will 
not be home to receive services or care that has been arranged for you.
• 
Informing Senior Health Partners before permanently moving out of the service area, 
or of any lengthy absence from the service area.
• 
Your actions if you refuse treatment or do not follow the instructions of 
your caregiver.
• 
Meeting your financial obligations.
Advance Directives
Advance Directives are legal documents that ensure that your requests are fulfilled in the 
event you cannot make decisions for yourself. Advance directives can come in the form 
of a Health Care Proxy, a Living Will or a Do Not Resuscitate Order. These documents 
can instruct what care you wish to be given under certain circumstances, and/or they 
can authorize a particular family member or friend to make decisions on your behalf.
• 
Do Not Resuscitate Order (DNR): a medical order written by a doctor which 
instructs health care providers not to perform cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) 
or other lifesaving emergency procedures if your heartbeat or breathing stops. 
These are arranged with your doctor prior to an emergency.
• 
Health Care Proxy: a form which lets you appoint a health care agent to make health 
care decisions for you if you are unable to make decisions for yourself. In order for 
the health care proxy to become effective, a doctor must decide that you are not 
able to make your own health care decisions.

--- Page 34 ---
Page 34 | 2025 Healthfirst Member Handbook
 ◦
Your appointed agent will make decisions for you, in accordance with your 
instructions or what they think is in your best interest after you lose the ability to 
make medical decisions.
 ◦
For more information on health care proxies, see the following New York 
State resources:
 ▪
“Deciding About Health Care: A Guide for Patients and Families”, 1503.pdf 
www.health.ny.gov/publications/1503.pdf
 ▪
Health Care Proxy: Appointing Your Health Care Agent in New York State: 
1430.pdf www.health.ny.gov/publications/1430.pdf
• 
A Living Will: a document in which you declare your health care wishes in the 
event you become unable to make medical decisions, especially about end‑of‑life 
care. In your living will, you are able to include a statement about your beliefs, 
values, general care goals, and treatment wishes. There is no template Living Will 
form in New York. 
It is your right to make advance directives as you wish. It is most important for 
you to document how you would like your care to continue if you are no longer 
able to communicate with providers in an informed way due to illness or injury. 
Please contact your Care Manager for assistance in completing these documents. 
If you already have an advanced directive, please share a copy with your care manager 
keep a copy for yourself, give a copy to the person you chose to make medical 
decisions for you, give a copy to your doctor and bring a copy with you if you go 
to the hospital.
Your doctor or someone on your Healthfirst Care Team can help answer any 
additional questions you may have. We can also help you find a provider who 
supports your wishes.
Medicaid Spend‑Down and NAMI 
Some Senior Health Partners members have too much income to qualify for Medicaid. 
This is called a surplus or excess income. Some people may qualify for Medicaid 
if they spend the surplus on medical bills, otherwise known as a “spend‑down.” 
The spend‑down amount paid to Senior Health Partners depends on your Medicaid 
eligibility and the monthly surplus program. 
Some Senior Health Partners members that have too much income to qualify for 
Medicaid and are a nursing home resident will have to pay a Net Available Monthly 
Income known as “NAMI.” This amount paid to Senior Health Partners depends on your 
Medicaid eligibility and the monthly surplus program.

--- Page 35 ---
Senior Health Partners Managed Long Term Care (MLTC) plan 
Page 35
If you are eligible for: You will pay:
Medicaid  
(no monthly 
spend‑down or NAMI)
Nothing to Senior Health Partners
Medicaid 
(with monthly 
spend‑down or NAMI)
A monthly spend‑down or NAMI to Senior Health Partners, 
as determined by New York City Human Resources 
Administration (HRA) or Local District of Social Services (LDSS).
If you are eligible for Medicaid with a spend‑down and your spend‑down changes while 
you are a Senior Health Partners member, your monthly payment will be adjusted. 
Senior Health Partners will make an effort to notify you payment is due. If you don’t 
pay the Medicaid spend‑down (or NAMI) within 30 days after the first of the month the 
payment is due, we may disenroll you.
Information Available on Request
• 
Information regarding the structure and operation of Senior Health Partners.
• 
Specific clinical review criteria relating to a particular health condition and other 
information that Senior Health Partners considers when authorizing services.
• 
Policies and procedures on protected health information.
• 
Written description of the organizational arrangements and ongoing procedures of 
the quality assurance and performance improvement program.
• 
Provider credentialing policies.
• 
A recent copy of the Senior Health Partners certified financial statement; policies and 
procedures used by Senior Health Partners to determine eligibility of a provider.
Electronic Notice Option
Senior Health Partners and our vendors can send you notices about service 
authorizations, plan appeals, complaints and complaint appeals electronically, instead 
of by phone or mail. We can also send you communications about your member 
handbook, our provider directory, and changes to Medicaid managed care benefits 
electronically, instead of by mail.
We can send you these notices to you through Healthfirst and our vendors can send 
these notices to you through MyHFNY.org. To get notices on MyHFNY.org, you need 
to have or create a member account on MyHFNY.org. When a new notice is available 
for you on MyHFNY.org, you will receive an email at the address that you provided 
us. You can then view your notices using Adobe Acrobat Reader on your computer 
or on a smartphone using a PDF reader app. There are no fees to create a member 
account on MyHFNY.org.

--- Page 36 ---
Page 36 | 2025 Healthfirst Member Handbook
If you want to get these notices electronically, you must ask us. To ask for electronic 
notices contact us by phone, email, online, fax, or mail:
Phone: 1‑800‑633‑9717
Online: MyHFNY.org
Mail* Senior Health Partners: 100 Church Street, 17th Floor New York, NY 10007
*When sending a letter in the mail, please include your member ID, your email address, 
and how you want to get notices normally sent by mail and by phone. You can use the 
Electronic Notice Request Form, but it is not required.
When you contact us, you must:
• 
Tell us how you want to get notices that are normally sent by mail,
• 
Tell us how you want to get notices that are normally made by phone call, and
• 
Give us your contact information (mobile phone number, email address, 
fax number, etc.).
Senior Health Partners will let you know by mail that you have asked to get notices 
electronically.
Quality Assurance and Improvement Program
Senior Health Partners has a Quality Management System to track and measure the 
quality of care and service. This detailed system must meet the New York State health 
and long‑term care quality assurance standards.
Our Quality Management System finds opportunities for 
Senior Health Partners to improve:
• 
Quality of service given.
• 
Management of care (including availability, access, and continuity).
• 
Operational and care management practices.
• 
Results in clinical, non‑clinical (including member experience), and functional areas.
The quality management system includes a plan to look for areas where improvement 
is needed, a process for the continuous improvement of performance, a review 
of the credentials of all providers providing care or service, maintenance of health 
information records, and review of service use. We welcome your suggestions about 
quality improvement.

--- Page 37 ---
Senior Health Partners Managed Long Term Care (MLTC) plan 
Page 37
Healthfirst Locations
We make it easy for you to contact us—over the phone, online, and in person. Visit one of our 
convenient community offices, our virtual community office online, and on social media.
 
Community Offices Near You
Bronx
Fordham
412 E. Fordham Road 
(entrance on Webster Avenue)
Parkchester
112 Hugh J. Grant Circle
(between Cross Bronx Expressway 
and Virginia Avenue)
Brooklyn
Bensonhurst
2236 86th Street
(between Bay 31st and 
Bay 32nd Streets) 
Brighton Beach
314 Brighton Beach Avenue
(between Brighton 3rd and 
Brighton 4th Streets)
Crown Heights
263 Utica Avenue
(between Eastern Parkway and 
Lincoln Place)
Flatbush
2166 Nostrand Avenue
(between Avenue H 
and Hillel Place)
Sunset Park
• 
5202 5th Avenue  
(corner of 5th Avenue 
and 52nd Street)
• 
5324 7th Avenue  
(between 53rd and 
54th Streets)
Manhattan
Chinatown
• 
128 Mott Street 
Room 407  
(between Grand and 
Hester Streets)
• 
28 E. Broadway (between 
Catherine and Market Streets)
East Harlem
116 E. 116th Street
(between Park and 
Lexington Avenues)
Washington Heights
1467 St. Nicholas Avenue
(between W. 183rd and 
W. 184th Streets)
Queens
Elmhurst
40‑08 81st Street (between 
Roosevelt and 41st Avenues)
Flushing
39‑06 Main Street
(between Roosevelt and 
39th Avenues)
Jackson Heights
93‑14 Roosevelt Avenue
(between Whitney Avenue 
and 94th Street)
Jamaica
161‑21 Jamaica Avenue
(corner of Jamaica Avenue 
and 162nd Street)
Richmond Hill
122‑01 Liberty Avenue
(between 122nd and 
123rd Streets)
Ridgewood
56‑29 Myrtle Avenue 
(entrance on Catalpa Avenue)
Long Island
Nassau County
Hempstead
242 Fulton Avenue
(between N. Franklin and 
Main Streets)
Suffolk County
Bay Shore
South Shore Mall 
1701 Sunrise Highway
(in the JCPenney Wing)
Hampton Bays
Bravo Hamptons 
Food Supermarkets
39 West Montauk Highway
(between Ponquogue Avenue and 
Springville Road)
Lake Grove
Smith Haven Mall 
313 Smith Haven Mall
(in the Sears Wing)
Patchogue
99 West Main Street
(between West and 
Havens Avenues)
Orange County
Newburgh
Crossroads Plaza
50 NY Route 17K
Westchester County
Yonkers
13 Main Street 
(between Warburton Avenue 
and N. Broadway)
Go to healthfirst.org/locations for our hours of operation, and visit HFVirtualCommunityOffice.org 
to connect with a Healthfirst representative in your area.

--- Page 38 ---
Page 38 | 2025 Healthfirst Member Handbook
Healthfirst complies with Federal civil rights laws. Healthfirst does not exclude people or treat them 
differently because of race, color, national origin, age, disability, or sex.
Healthfirst provides the following:
•  Free aids and services to people with disabilities to help you 
communicate with us, such as:
 ◦Qualified sign language interpreters
 ◦Written information in other formats (large print, audio, 
accessible electronic formats, other formats)
• Free language services to people whose first language is not 
English, such as:
 ◦Qualified interpreters
 ◦Information written in other languages
If you need these services, call Healthfirst at 1‑866‑305‑0408. 
For TTY services, call 1‑888‑542‑3821.
If you believe that Healthfirst has not given you these services or has treated you differently because 
of race, color, national origin, age, disability, or sex, you can file a grievance with Healthfirst by:
• 
Mail:  Healthfirst Member Services, P.O. Box 5165, New York, NY 10274‑5165
• 
Phone:  1‑866‑305‑0408 (for TTY services, call 1‑888‑542‑3821)
• 
Fax:  1‑212‑801‑3250
• 
In person:  Visit a Healthfirst Community Office. Locations and hours are available at  
Healthfirst.org/CommunityOffices
You can also file a civil rights complaint with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
Office for Civil Rights by:
• 
Web: Office for Civil Rights Complaint Portal at https://ocrportal.hhs.gov/ocr/portal/lobby.jsf
• 
Mail:  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
200 Independence Avenue SW., Room 509F, HHH Building, Washington, DC 20201 
Complaint forms are available at http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/office/file/index.html
• 
Phone: 1‑800‑368‑1019 (TTY 800‑537‑7697)
Notice of Non‑Discrimination

--- Page 39 ---
Senior Health Partners Managed Long Term Care (MLTC) plan 
Page 39
 
 
ATTENTION: Language assistance services, free of charge, are available to you. 
Call 1-866-305-0408 (TTY 1-888-542-3821). 
English 
ATENCIÓN: si habla español, tiene a su disposición servicios gratuitos de asistencia 
lingüística. Llame al 1-866-305-0408 (TTY: 1-888-867-4132). 
Spanish 
注意：如果您使用繁體中文，您可以免費獲得語言援助服務。請致電 1-866-305-0408 
(TTY: 1-888-542-3821). 
Chinese 
ﻣﻠﺣوظﺔ: إذا ﻛﻧت ﺗﺗﺣدث اﻟﻌرﺑﯾﺔ، ﻓﺳوف ﺗﺗوﻓر ﺧدﻣﺎت اﻟﻣﺳﺎﻋدة اﻟﻠﻐوﯾﺔ ﻟك ﺑﺎﻟﻣﺟﺎن. اﺗﺻل ﺑرﻗم 1-866-305-0408
 
(TTY: 1-888-542-3821)
. 
Arabic 
주의: 한국어를 사용하시는 경우, 언어 지원 서비스를 무료로 이용하실 수 있습니다 
1-866-305-0408 (TTY: 1-888-542-3821). 번으로 전화해 주십시오. 
Korean 
ВНИМАНИЕ: Если вы говорите на русском языке, то вам доступны бесплатные 
услуги перевода. Звоните 1-866-305-0408 (TTY: 1-888-542-3821). 
Russian 
ATTENZIONE: In caso la lingua parlata sia l'italiano, sono disponibili servizi di 
assistenza linguistica gratuiti. Chiamare il numero 1-866-305-0408  
(TTY: 1-888-542-3821). 
Italian 
ATTENTION : Si vous parlez français, des services d'aide linguistique vous sont 
proposés gratuitement. Appelez le 1-866-305-0408 (TTY: 1-888-542-3821). 
French 
ATANSYON: Si w pale Kreyòl Ayisyen, gen sèvis èd pou lang ki disponib gratis pou 
ou. Rele 1-866-305-0408 (TTY: 1-888-542-3821). 
French Creole 
אויפמערקזאם: אויב איר רעדט אידיש, זענען פארהאן פאר אייך שפראך הילף סערוויסעס פריי פון 
אפצאל. רופט 
(TTY 1-888-542-3821) 1-866-305-0408
.
 
Yiddish 
UWAGA: Jeżeli mówisz po polsku, możesz skorzystać z bezpłatnej pomocy językowej. 
Zadzwoń pod numer 1-866-305-0408 (TTY: 1-888-542-3821). 
Polish 
PAUNAWA: Kung nagsasalita ka ng Tagalog, maaari kang gumamit ng mga serbisyo 
ng tulong sa wika nang walang bayad. Tumawag sa 1-866-305-0408  
(TTY: 1-888-542-3821). 
Tagalog 
ল"# ক&নঃ যিদ আপিন বাংলা, কথা বলেত পােরন, তাহেল িনঃখরচায় ভাষা সহায়তা পিরেষবা 
উপল> আেছ। Aফান ক&ন ১ 1-866-305-0408 (TTY: 1-888-542-3821). 
Bengali 
KUJDES: Nëse flitni shqip, për ju ka në dispozicion shërbime të asistencës gjuhësore, 
pa pagesë. Telefononi në 1-866-305-0408 (TTY: 1-888-542-3821). 
Albanian 
ΠΡΟΣΟΧΗ: Αν μιλάτε ελληνικά, στη διάθεσή σας βρίσκονται υπηρεσίες γλωσσικής 
υποστήριξης, οι οποίες παρέχονται δωρεάν. Καλέστε 1-866-305-0408  
(TTY: 1-888-542-3821). 
Greek 
ﺧﺑردار: اﮔر آپ اردو ﺑوﻟﺗﮯ ﮨﯾں، ﺗو آپ ﮐو زﺑﺎن ﮐﯽ ﻣدد ﮐﯽ ﺧدﻣﺎت ﻣﻔت ﻣﯾں دﺳﺗﯾﺎب ﮨﯾں۔ ﮐﺎل ﮐرﯾں  
(TTY 1-888-542-3821) 1-866-305-0408۔  Urdu 

--- Page 40 ---
Coverage for Senior Health Partners Managed Long-Term 
Care Plan is provided by Healthfirst PHSP, Inc. Plans contain 
exclusions and limitations.
0983-24 SHP25_16 
